Fix bug in downloading nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml from Github within project.Makefile (#2612)
microbiomedata/nmdc-schema: nmdc_schema/migrators/README.md

In this document, I'll refer to those Python classes as "migrators."

## Table Of Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Creating a migrator](#creating-a-migrator)
- [Adding Migration Reporting](#adding-migration-reporting)
- [Adding Transaction Support](#adding-transaction-support)
- [Testing the migrator](#testing-the-migrator)
    * [Summary of steps to test a migrator with a local copy of the MongoDB database](#summary-of-steps-to-test-a-migrator-with-a-local-copy-of-the-mongodb-database)
    * [Running a migrator with Docker step-by-step](#running-a-migrator-with-docker-step-by-step)
    * [Summary of steps to test a migrator with the API](#summary-of-steps-to-test-a-migrator-with-the-api)
    * [Running a migrator with project.Makefile step-by-step](#running-a-migrator-with-projectmakefile-step-by-step)

> <a id="code-of-conduct"></a>

Reviewer: This looks to me like an empty HTML hyperlink. I think it was included by accident.

```suggestion
```

## Testing the migrator

> There are two documented ways to test migrators against copies of the database. One way uses Docker to pull down a local copy of the MongoDB and another uses the runtime API to gather colelctions of interest via `project.Makfile`. Either way is a valid way to test migrators, but you should understand what each version is doing to ensure you are testing properly. 

Reviewer: I felt confused after reading the summaries of the two ways.

> pull down a local copy of the MongoDB

I don't know whether this is referring to one of the nightly database dumps residing on the NERSC filesystem, or it is saying that a dump is created _in the moment_ from the production MongoDB database. I think it will become more apparent to me as I continue reading.

There was a typo in "collections."

```suggestion
There are two documented ways to test migrators against copies of the database. One way uses Docker to pull down a local copy of the MongoDB and another uses the runtime API to gather collections of interest via `project.Makfile`. Either way is a valid way to test migrators, but you should understand what each version is doing to ensure you are testing properly.
```

Reviewer: After reading more about the first way, I suggest rephrasing it as follows:

```diff
- One way uses Docker to pull down a local copy of the MongoDB
+ One way involves loading a database dump into a containerized MongoDB server and running the migrator against that database
```

In the instructions about the first way, the migrator is not being run within a Docker container—it is being run locally and accessing the MongoDB database that's within a Docker container.

# This commits the changes to the database
% make run-migrator MIGRATOR=migrator_from_1_0_0_to_EXAMPLE ACTION=commit
```

### Summary of steps to test a migrator with the API:

> 1. Run make command to test docstring and generate new schema file. 

Reviewer: When referring to Make in prose, I recommend delimiting it from the surrounding text in some way; for example, putting single backticks around it (like this: `make`) or capitalizing the "M" (as in https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Make_(software)). Otherwise, I think it will be difficult some people to parse the statement.

```suggestion
1. Run `make` command to test docstring and generate new schema file. 
```

2. Create a local copy of the latest schema release.
3. Run API request to create a local copy of collections of interest.
4. Run the migrator against the test database.
5. Run validation checks against the migrated database.

All local files are saved to `local/`

### Running a migrator with project.makefile step-by-step:
> **⚠️ WARNING: Do NOT commit any local edits to `project.Makefile`!**
>
> The `project.Makefile` is a shared build and automation file for the entire project. Any changes made for local testing or experimentation should **never** be committed to version control. Committing edits may break CI/CD pipelines or disrupt other developers' workflows.
>

> > If you want to make contributions or add commands that would be helpful for wider use, create an issue and PR. 

Reviewer: I'd suggest putting this warning in the `project.Makefile` instead of here.

> 1. **Test docstrings and create a local copy of the schema according to your local instance**

Reviewer: In the Python documentation, the word, "[doctest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/doctest.html)", is used to refer to the tests that are in docstrings. I'd prefer sticking to that here.

```suggestion
1. **Run doctests and create a local copy of the schema according to your local instance**
```

Each migrator should contain docstring tests. This step is important to catch syntax errors AND to **generate a new schema yaml file** to use in the local database tests. To run the docstring test and generate a new schema file run.  This step also validates the schema and the example data in this repo.

```bash
% make squeaky-clean test all
```

2. **Run the test-migrator-on-database command with appropriate params**

> The `test-migrator-on-database` command combines 3 separate commands into one. Using parameters, it removes the need to directly edit the makefile each time you test a new migrator. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `test-migrator-on-database` command combines 3 separate commands into one. Using parameters, it removes the need to directly edit `project.Makefile` each time you test a new migrator. 
```

The project contains multiple Makefiles.

The following parameters are available:

> - SELECTED_COLLECTIONS - specify the collections of interest to download (i.e. collections that your migrator changes). The default is all collections EXCEPT functional_annotation_agg

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- SELECTED_COLLECTIONS - specify the collections of interest to download (i.e. collections that your migrator changes), separated by a space. The default is all collections EXCEPT functional_annotation_agg.
```

> - SELECTED_COLLECTIONS - specify the collections of interest to download (i.e. collections that your migrator changes), separated by a space. The default is all collections EXCEPT functional_annotation_agg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- SELECTED_COLLECTIONS - specify the collections you want to download (i.e. collections that your migrator changes), each one separated by a space. The default is all collections EXCEPT `functional_annotation_agg`.
```

- MIGRATOR - the name of the migrator file. DO NOT INCLUDE `.py` EXT
- ENV  - whether to gather data from the prod or dev runtime API environment. The default is prod. 

> **For partials, you must reference the file that wraps the partials, not individual partials.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**For testing partial migrators, you must reference the file that wraps the partials, not individual partials. All collections modified in any of the partial migrators should be selected in the SELECTED_COLLECTIONS parameter**
```

For example, if I wanted to test `migrator_from_11_6_1_to_11_7_0` and only download the data_object_set in prod, I would run:

```bash
% make test-migrator-on-database MIGRATOR=migrator_from_11_6_1_to_11_7_0 SELECTED_COLLECTIONS=data_object_set
```

> To run in dev:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To download data via the _development_ instance of the NMDC Runtime:
```

```bash
% make test-migrator-on-database MIGRATOR=migrator_from_11_6_1_to_11_7_0 SELECTED_COLLECTIONS=data_object_set ENV=dev
```

> To call multiple collections, space separate them:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify multiple collections, separate their names with spaces:
```

```bash
% make test-migrator MIGRATOR=migrator_from_11_6_1_to_11_7_0 SELECTED_COLLECTIONS=data_object_set biosample_set ENV=dev
```

> **NOTE**
>`% make rdf-clean` will delete locally generated files from the testing process. This can be helpful if a bug was identified and the `make` commands need to be rerun after a change. 

> That's it! Errors will output to `local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_validation.log` and there will be an alert in the terminal is this occurs. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's it! Errors will output to `local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_validation.log` and there will be an alert in the terminal if this occurs. 
```

3. **In-depth discussion of test-migrator**

> As mentioned, the `test-migrator-on-database` command is comprised of three commands. Each command can be ran separately outside of `test-migrator-on-database`. This may come in handy when you want to test a change to the migrator, but do not want to download the database again (saves time).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned, the `test-migrator-on-database` command is comprised of three commands. Each command can be run separately outside of `test-migrator-on-database`. This may come in handy when you want to test a change to the migrator, but do not want to download the database again (saves time).
```

- `% make local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml SELECTED_COLLECTIONS=`

>     * This command creates a local dump of the selected collections and saves it to the path local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * This command creates a local, YAML-formatted dump of the selected collections and saves it to the path, `local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml`
```

- `% make local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_after_migrator.yaml MIGRATOR=`
    * This command runs the migrator on the database dump in local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml and saves the changes to file path local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_after_migrator.yaml
- `% make local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_validation.log`

>     * This commands validates the migrator changes using nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml on the branch. This file will have been recompiled with your schema changes after running `make squeaky-clean test all`. It is important to test agianst your changes, as this will be the newest version of the schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * This commands validates the migrated collections against `nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml` on the branch. This file will have been recompiled with your schema changes after running `make squeaky-clean test all`. It is important to test against your changes, as this will be the newest version of the schema.
```

> If desired, there is functionality to test against the current release. There are a few ways to do this (being on main branch, not recompiling nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml) but to do so via project.Makefile use the `$(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)` variable. This variable makes a call to Github and downloads the latest release of nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml to a local file. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If desired, there is functionality to test against the current release (as opposed to a local branch). There are a few ways to do this (being on main branch, not recompiling nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml) but to do so via project.Makefile use the `$(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)` variable. This variable makes a call to Github and downloads the latest release of nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml to a local file. 
```

> If desired, there is functionality to test against the current release (as opposed to a local branch). There are a few ways to do this (being on main branch, not recompiling nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml) but to do so via project.Makefile use the `$(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)` variable. This variable makes a call to Github and downloads the latest release of nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml to a local file. 

Reviewer: I'm confused about this paragraph.

> the current release

> being on main branch

> downloads the latest release

The most recently-released version of `nmdc-schema` is not necessarily the same as what is on the latest commit on the `main` branch. The latter changes whenever a PR gets merged into the repo.

If the Make target specifically gets files from the Git tag associated with the most recently-released version of `nmdc-schema`, I'd suggest phrasing things this way:

```suggestion
You can also test against the most recently-released version of `nmdc-schema` (as opposed to a local branch). To do so via `project.Makefile`, use the `$(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)` variable. That variable is used by a command that will download the specified version of the `nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml` file from GitHub, to a local file.
```

Author: the end of your sentenc is not entirely correct for what the functionality is. I will make a blend of mine and your suggestion.

- In `local/mongo_via_api_as_unvalidated_nmdc_database.yaml` replace `--schema-source` with `$(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)`
- Replace `local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_after_migrator.yaml: nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml` with `local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_after_migrator.yaml: $(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)`
- Replace `local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_validation.log: nmdc_schema/nmdc_materialized_patterns.yaml` with `local/mongo_via_api_as_nmdc_database_validation.log: $(LATEST_TAG_SCHEMA_FILE)`

> > Remember not to commit these local changes as this will interfere with others testing processes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Remember not to commit these local changes as this will interfere with others' testing processes. 
```
